x/ibc: transfer specs (#7580)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: x/ibc/applications/transfer/spec/01_concepts.md

An unsuccessful receive of a transfer packet will result in an Error Acknowledgement being written
with the error message in the `Response` field.

## Denomination Trace

The denomination trace corresponds to the information that allows a token to be traced back to its
origin chain. It contains a sequence of port and channel identifiers ordered from the most recent to
the oldest in the timeline of transfers.

This information is included on the token denomination field in the form of a hash to prevent an unbounded denomination length. For example, the token `transfer/channelToA/uatom` will be displayed as
`ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2`.

Each send to any chain other than the one it was previously received from is a movement forwards in
the token's timeline. This causes trace to be added to the token's history and the destination port
and destination channel to be prefixed to the denomination. In these instances the sender chain is
acting as the "source zone". When the token is sent back to the chain it previously received from, the
prefix is removed. This is a backwards movement in the token's timeline and the sender chain is

> acting as the "sink zone".

Reviewer: It would be good to provide an example querying the denom trace and then querying the channel/connection to get the origin chain-id here.

Author: done

> ### UX suggestion for clients

Author: I'm especially interested in feedback for this section in particular. cc @colin-axner @cwgoes @zmanian @jackzampolin

> For clients that want to display the source of the token, it is recommended to one of the following alternatives:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For clients that want to display the source of the token, it is recommended to use one of the following alternatives:
```

> - **Use a relayer service**: Available relayer services could map the each denomination trace info and return the chain path timeline for each token (i.e `origin chain -> chain #1 -> ... -> chain #(n-1) -> final chain`). Clients are advised to connect to public relayers that support the largest number of connections between chains in the ecosystem.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Use a relayer service**: Available relayer services could map the denomination trace to the chain path timeline for each token (i.e `origin chain -> chain #1 -> ... -> chain #(n-1) -> final chain`). Clients are advised to connect to public relayers that support the largest number of connections between chains in the ecosystem.
```

> - **Map trace information directly:** If the chain you are connected is also connected to each of the channels from the denomination trace information, then it is possible to retrieve the chain path timeline directly through a series of queries:

Reviewer 2: I think this section should be replace with how a relayer (or an exchange) might implement keeping track of chain IDs ie recursive gRPC calls to the origin chain

1. Query the full denomination trace.
1. For each port and channel identifier pair (from left to right) in the trace info:

>     1. Query the client state using the identifiers pair. Note that this query will return a "Not Found" response if the current chain is not connected to this channel.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't work even if they are all connected. Each port/channel pair represents the port/channel name given the context of some specific chain.

A transfer from A -> B -> C. Even if C is connected to A, the connection from A -> B may have completely different identifier than the connection from A -> C. But in the proposed spec, the channel/port path used for A -> B is assumed to be equal to A -> C

    1. Retrieve the the client identifier or chain identifier from the client state and (eg: on Tendermint clients) insert it to a map or array as desired.
1. Query the channel with the right-most pair, which corresponds to the first destination of the token.
1. Query the the client state (like on step 2.1) using the counterparty port and channel identifiers from the above result.
1. Retrieve the the client identifier or chain identifier like on 2.2.

## Locked Funds

In some [exceptional cases](./../../../../../docs/architecture/adr-026-ibc-client-recovery-mechanisms.md#exceptional-cases), a client state associated with a given channel cannot be updated. This causes that funds from fungible tokens in that channel will be permanently locked and thus can no longer be transferred.

> To mitigate this, it an client update governance proposal can be submitted to update the frozen client with a new valid header. Once the proposal passes the client state will be unfreezed and the funds from the associated channels unlocked.

Reviewer 2: It should be noted this is only true if the client allows this

> To mitigate this, it an client update governance proposal can be submitted to update the frozen client with a new valid header. Once the proposal passes the client state will be unfreezed and the funds from the associated channels unlocked.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To mitigate this, a client update governance proposal can be submitted to update the frozen client with a new valid header. Once the proposal passes the client state will be unfrozen and the funds from the associated channels will then be unlocked.
```

with the error message in the `Response` field.

## Denomination Trace

The denomination trace corresponds to the information that allows a token to be traced back to its
origin chain. It contains a sequence of port and channel identifiers ordered from the most recent to
the oldest in the timeline of transfers.

This information is included on the token denomination field in the form of a hash to prevent an
unbounded denomination length. For example, the token `transfer/channelToA/uatom` will be displayed
as `ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2`.

Each send to any chain other than the one it was previously received from is a movement forwards in
the token's timeline. This causes trace to be added to the token's history and the destination port
and destination channel to be prefixed to the denomination. In these instances the sender chain is
acting as the "source zone". When the token is sent back to the chain it previously received from, the
prefix is removed. This is a backwards movement in the token's timeline and the sender chain is
acting as the "sink zone".

> ### UX suggestion for clients

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### UX suggestions for clients
```

For clients that want to display the source of the token, it is recommended to use one of the following alternatives:

> - **Use a relayer service**: Available relayer services could map the denomination trace to the

Reviewer 4: Can this be verified (locally)?

  chain path timeline for each token (i.e `origin chain -> chain #1 -> ... -> chain #(n-1) -> final
  chain`). Clients are advised to connect to public relayers that support the largest number of
  connections between chains in the ecosystem.

> - **Map trace information directly:** If the chain you are connected is also connected to each of

Reviewer 4: I think this should be the primary recommended approach, since it does not add a trusted party (unless there's some way we can query from relayers without trusting them)

  the channels from the denomination trace information, then it is theoretically possible to
  retrieve the chain path timeline directly through a series of queries:

::: tip
 From a chain's perspective, the IBC protocol doesn't know the topology of the network (i.e

>  connections between chains and identifier names between them). The proposed solution only works if

Reviewer 4: I don't quite follow - it should always be possible to trace the path back if ICS 20 is followed, no?

Reviewer 4: Hmm yes, that's true, but by repeatedly following the source port & channel a querier should always be able to find all the relevant identifiers (though it might require more queries, I guess)

unbounded denomination length. For example, the token `transfer/channelToA/uatom` will be displayed
as `ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2`.

Each send to any chain other than the one it was previously received from is a movement forwards in
the token's timeline. This causes trace to be added to the token's history and the destination port
and destination channel to be prefixed to the denomination. In these instances the sender chain is
acting as the "source zone". When the token is sent back to the chain it previously received from, the
prefix is removed. This is a backwards movement in the token's timeline and the sender chain is
acting as the "sink zone".

It is strongly recommended to read the full details of [ADR 001: Coin Source Tracing](./../../../../../docs/architecture/adr-001-coin-source-tracing.md) to understand the implications and context of the IBC token representations.

### UX suggestions for clients

For clients that want to display the source of the token, it is recommended to use the following
alternatives for each of the following cases:

> #### Direct connection

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#### Single Channel Hop
```

Connection is a name-clash with IBC connection which is separate

If the denomination trace contains a single identifier prefix pair (as in the example above), then
the easiest way to retrieve the chain and light client identifier is to map the trace information
directly. In summary, this requires querying the channel from the denomination trace identifiers,
and then the counterparty client state using the counterparty port and channel identifiers from the
retrieved channel.

A general pseudo algorithm would look like the following:

1. Query the full denomination trace.

> 2. Query the channel with the `portID/channelID` pair, which corresponds to the first destination of the
>    token.
> 3. Query the client state using the identifiers pair. Note that this query will return a `"Not
>    Found"` response if the current chain is not connected to this channel.
> 4. Retrieve the the client identifier or chain identifier from the client state (eg: on
>    Tendermint clients) and store it locally.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. Query the client state associated with the `portID/channelID` channel, which corresponds to the source of the
   token. 
   Note that this query will return a `"Not Found"` response if the current chain is not connected to this channel.
3. Retrieve the the client identifier or chain identifier from the client state (eg: on
   Tendermint clients) and store it locally.
```

Author: you need to perform the query using the channel counterparty to get the origin chain

> Using the gRPC gataway client service the steps above would be, with a given IBC token `ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2`:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Using the gRPC gataway client service the steps above would be, with a given IBC token `ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2` stored on `chainB`:
```

1. `GET /ibc_transfer/v1beta1/denom_traces/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2` -> `{"path": "transfer/channelToA", "base_denom": "uatom"}`
2. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToA/ports/transfer/client_state"` -> `{"client_id": "clientA", "chain-id": "chainA", ...}`
3. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToA/ports/transfer"` -> `{"channel_id": "channelToA", port_id": "transfer", counterparty: {"channel_id": "channelToB", port_id": "transfer"}, ...}`

> 4. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToB/ports/transfer/client_state" -> {"client_id": "clientB", "chain-id": "chainB",}`

Reviewer 5: This looks wrong, in a direct connection there would be no need to query the counterparty chainID information because we already know our own chain-id.

```suggestion
1. `GET /ibc_transfer/v1beta1/denom_traces/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2` -> `{"path": "transfer/channelToA", "base_denom": "uatom"}`
2. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToA/ports/transfer/client_state"` -> `{"client_id": "clientA", "chain-id": "chainA", ...}`
```

> Then, the token transfer chain path for the `uatom` denomination would be: `chainB` -> `chainA`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Then, the token transfer chain path for the `uatom` denomination would be: `chainA` -> `chainB`.
```

> ### Multiple connection hops

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
### Multiple channel hops
```

Let's call this multiple channel hops. Multiple connection hops is a separate feature that is unrelated

> The IBC protocol doesn't know the topology of the overall network (i.e connections between chains and identifier names between them). In the concrete case of fungible token transfers with more than one connection hop, a particular chain in the timeline of the individual transfers can't query the chain and client identifiers of the other chains.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The IBC protocol doesn't know the topology of the overall network (i.e connections between chains and identifier names between them). In the concrete case of fungible token transfers with more than one channel hop (ie the token has passed through multiple chains between the original source and final destination chains), a particular chain in the timeline of the individual transfers can not query the chain and client identifiers of the other chains.
```

Take for example the following sequence of transfers `A -> B -> C` for an IBC token, with a final prefix path (trace info) of `transfer/channelChainC/transfer/channelChainB`. What the paragraph above means is that is that even in the case that chain `C` is directly connected to chain `A`, querying the port and channel identifiers that chain `B` uses to connect to chain `A` (eg: `transfer/channelChainA`) can be completely different from the one that chain `C` uses to connect to chain `A` (eg: `transfer/channelToChainA`).

Thus the proposed solution for clients that the IBC team recommends are the following:

> - **Connect to all chains**: Connecting to all the chains in the timeline would allow clients to

Reviewer 5: This won't work. As you stated eariler, even if a chain connects to all the chains in the timeline, they will all use different identifiers for a given chain. So you cannot take the channel identifiers that another chain uses and query on your own chain and expect to get the same answer,

Reviewer 5: RETRACTED

> - **Connect to all chains**: Connecting to all the chains in the timeline would allow clients to
>   perform the queries outlined in the [direct connection](#direct-connection) section to each
>   relevant chain. By repeatedly following the port and channel denomination trace transfer timeline,
>   clients should always be able to find all the relevant identifiers. This comes at the tradeoff
>   that the client must connect to nodes on each of the chains in order to perform the queries.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 5: RETRACTED

> - **Relayer as a Service (RaaS)**: A longer term solution is to use/create a relayer service that

Reviewer 4: The other problem is that this can't be verified, unless you had a method in mind?

Reviewer 4: yes but the clients will still need to run light clients for all the chains in order to do that?

it does simplify the queries at least

Author: I'll add a note

  could map the denomination trace to the chain path timeline for each token (i.e `origin chain ->
  chain #1 -> ... -> chain #(n-1) -> final chain`). Clients would be advised to connect to public

>   relayers that support the largest number of connections between chains in the ecosystem. Unfortunately, none of the existing public relayers (in [Golang](https://github.com/cosmos/relayer) and [Rust](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs)), provide this service to clients.

Reviewer 5: This isn't necessarily a relayer function (though relayers could also provide this service). This really is describing an `IBC explorer` which is a separate thing from a relayer service.

```suggestion
- **IBC Explorer**: One solution is to use/create an IBC explorer service that maps the locally used channel and client identifiers used by each chain to the global identifiers (chain-id) that they correspond to. A client can then take a given denomination trace and iteratively query each channel identifier against the chain that uses that identifier in the token's timeline.

Given the existence of an IBC explorer service. A client psuedo algorithm may look like this:

1. Retrieve the denomination trace of the token => `transfer/channelC/transfer/channelB/transfer/channelA` on the current chain `chainD`.
2. Retrieve the immediately preceding blockchain `chainC` in the timeline by querying the explorer against our current `chainD` with the first channel-id `channelC` in the trace.
3. Use the resulting `chainC` to query for the prior blockchain in the timeline by querying the explorer for the blockchain corresponding to `channelB` on `chainC`.
4. Use the resulting `chainB` to query for the prior blockchain in the timeline by querying the explorer for the blockchain corresponding to `channelA` on `chainB`.

This will provide a full history of the token: `chainA (source location)` -> `chainB` -> `chainC` -> `chainD (current location)`

**Important Note**: The only thing that is provable from `chainD` is the token trace which is a list of the local channel- and port-identifiers the token passed through from source to the current location. From this information, the chain-id of the immediate predecessor is also provable as shown in the `Single channel hop` example. IBC explorers must be trusted by clients to provide the correct chain history given a list of local channel identifiers. Since this is a relaxation of the security model of the core IBC spec, any chain history provided by an IBC explorer must be explicitly understood and displayed as coming from a (potentially) untrustworthy IBC explorer so that end users may decide whether or not to trust that information.

An implementation of an IBC explorer does not currently exist, though they may become an important part of the ecosystem as multi-chain token histories become more common.
```

> ::: tip
> The only viable alternative for clients (at the time of writing) to tokens with multiple connection hops, is to connect to all chains directly and perform relevant queries to each of them in the sequence.
> :::

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```

This is not true and will not work for the reasons stated above

Reviewer 5: RETRACTED

> ## Locked Funds

Reviewer 5: In addition to this, we should also mention that to retrieve a token in its original form, the token must be sent back along the exact route that it took originally. Sending a token back to the same chain across a different channel will not move the token back across its timeline. If a channel in the chain history closes before the token can be sent back across that channel, then the token will not be returnable to its original form.

Reviewer 3: This is a really important point and something user interfaces should help with

retrieved channel.

A general pseudo algorithm would look like the following:

1. Query the full denomination trace.
2. Query the channel with the `portID/channelID` pair, which corresponds to the first destination of the
   token.
3. Query the client state using the identifiers pair. Note that this query will return a `"Not
   Found"` response if the current chain is not connected to this channel.
4. Retrieve the the client identifier or chain identifier from the client state (eg: on
   Tendermint clients) and store it locally.

Using the gRPC gataway client service the steps above would be, with a given IBC token `ibc/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2`:

1. `GET /ibc_transfer/v1beta1/denom_traces/7F1D3FCF4AE79E1554D670D1AD949A9BA4E4A3C76C63093E17E446A46061A7A2` -> `{"path": "transfer/channelToA", "base_denom": "uatom"}`
2. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToA/ports/transfer/client_state"` -> `{"client_id": "clientA", "chain-id": "chainA", ...}`
3. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToA/ports/transfer"` -> `{"channel_id": "channelToA", port_id": "transfer", counterparty: {"channel_id": "channelToB", port_id": "transfer"}, ...}`

> 4. `GET /ibc/channel/v1beta1/channels/channelToB/ports/transfer/client_state" -> {"client_id": "clientB", "chain-id": "chainB", ...}`

Reviewer 3: We should add a route that does this instead of pushing this work on to clients

Thus the proposed solution for clients that the IBC team recommends are the following:

- **Connect to all chains**: Connecting to all the chains in the timeline would allow clients to
  perform the queries outlined in the [direct connection](#direct-connection) section to each
  relevant chain. By repeatedly following the port and channel denomination trace transfer timeline,
  clients should always be able to find all the relevant identifiers. This comes at the tradeoff
  that the client must connect to nodes on each of the chains in order to perform the queries.
- **Relayer as a Service (RaaS)**: A longer term solution is to use/create a relayer service that
  could map the denomination trace to the chain path timeline for each token (i.e `origin chain ->

>   chain #1 -> ... -> chain #(n-1) -> final chain`). These services could provide merkle proofs in

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure merkle proofs would exactly solve this problem since the client would have to know the validator sets of each chain in the token timeline in order to verify the proof root was signed by the right validator set (as AppHash in the block header). I think it makes sense to think of this as an optionally trusted third party that users can rely on

  order to allow clients to optionally verify the path timeline correctness for themselves.
  Additionally, client would be advised in the future to use RaaS that support the largest number of

>   connections between chains in the ecosystem. Unfortunately, none of the existing public relayers

Reviewer 3: I think adding support for this in the upcoming relayer rest interface would be doable.
